Carnive Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Mike Chubb.
The venue is the Swicker office.
And the date today is Tuesday the 2nd of December 2015.
Mike, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full
for the record, please?
It's Michael, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, Chubb, C-H-U-B-B.
Thank you very much.
Mike, what are your earliest recollections of the Cardiff
mass carnival as it was known then?
Well, I remember going right back to when we talked about
funding at the time when it was quite difficult to actually
get screw money out of people.
And we did, we managed it.
And I think from memory serves, you
managed to get a grant from the arts committee.
Can you remember that?
From Cardiff County Council and indeed...
No, City Council.
City Council, sorry.
And Supporting Kind, the first venue for the carnival camp
was somewhat far away from its key participants, who were
largely based in Butown, was Insull Court.
Oh, yes.
A very beautiful venue in Clandaff, in the north of the city.
Run by two dancers.
Yeah, absolutely.
And the Rottweiler, as I recall.
Yes.
Anyway, so obviously it was important that we were in touch
with the project as much as we could.
But at the time, we were really quite busy putting together
what effectively is one of the first Cardiff festivals, or
Cardiff summer festivals.
Can you just clarify, what was your role?
Who were you working for at this point in your life?
Well, at the time I started, well, the summer festival was
called the Shopping Festival.
And it was run by a marketeer at Leisure and Amenities.
And I was a play officer, running the
Adventure Playgrounds.
I was really disillusioned with what she did, but I
couldn't do anything.
It's her bag.
But then she left, and I somehow...
Theatres, I mean, I've been brought up as an actor, and
also a drama, and I'm not qualified to teach and all
that.
But I always felt that the city needed something that was
exciting.
And what, she was a lovely girl, don't get me wrong, but
she used to bring in lots of plenty of
cheek, cheerful clowns.
And if you'd seen one balloon modeler, you'd seen 50 balloon
modelers.
And I knew there was something different out there.
I knew there was, but I didn't have a clue where.
So I managed to get Leisure and Amenities, who were quite
supportive, unless I overspent, which I did most of
the time.
They let me go down to London, and I went to Covent Garden.
And their Dick tea was putting on the Covent Garden Street
Festival.
So I met Dick, and I saw really amazing street artists
that have never seen it before.
I was absolutely stunned.
Was Eddie Izzard one of them?
Because he was performing, and that's where he began.
Yeah, I know.
It was just like, whoa, small town boy, come to London, see
all this stuff.
Anyway, I met up with an artist called Les Bubb in a pub.
And he put me in touch with his agent.
And he put me in touch with the guy who was responsible
marketing Orangina.
And to cut a long story short, I bragged 5,000 pounds from
Orangina the first year, and it was 10,000 the second year.
But that allowed me then to actually really consider what
do we want to do on the street.
And that's where the summer festival started from.
It was a street festival.
Everything else came afterwards.
But I found more and more of my time was being spent
organizing this street festival.
So much so that the department getting a bit pissed off with
me about spending so much time and not doing a proper job.
By then, I was also head of community.
So I was running all the community halls, and that's
where Rob Corp comes in, who we'll discuss later.
Maybe, if I'm allowed to.
And it got to the point when it was getting quite successful
after the first or second year.
I was getting more money in.
I wasn't ever spending that much.
And in the end, they gave me the job.
At that time, there were no interviews.
Yeah, go on.
You see what you can do with it.
And that's how it all started.
Would your job title be what?
Some festival coordinator, festival director?
I don't think it.
I can't remember what the title was.
You just did it.
Oh, I'll call myself festival director, perhaps.
Much of the chagrin of Mike Turle.
Because Mike Turle used to run the Cardiff Festival, but that
was in September.
And he was absolutely spitting bricks.
Because the more successful it became, the more the city was
taken over by amazing things.
He wanted it then to be moved into September.
And I said, no, Mike, no.
It won't suit September.
Yours is an indoor thing.
Mine is outside.
The two don't go together.
Anyway, it got to the point when he tried to run me over
in the car park, the city hall.
And it's true, because Jane Davidson, who was on the arts
committee at the time, was there and saw it happen.
Anyway, nevertheless, he didn't.
And going back to the question about Massie.
His lawyers will be in touch.
His lawyers?
He's dead.
He can't prove anything.
But I remember, so does Jane.
Anyway, Massie impressed me, A, because of the community
context in which it took place, and B, because you seem to be
quite a nice guy.
But I'm just saying that for the sake of this recording.
But it ticked all the buttons on the boxes.
Because it wasn't so much the art form.
It was where it was positioned in the whole calendar.
And it was about involvement.
It was about multiculturalism.
It was about open space.
I mean, I used to say about the festival
that you had to make a detour to avoid it.
That was all free as well, which is most unusual these days.
And there's only one festival I know of in the UK
that is the same, and that's Stockton on Tees,
the Riverside Festival run by Frank Wilson.
And he's been doing it.
He started it here at the same time
as I started the Cardiff Summer Festival.
He's been going for a long, long time.
And his understanding of international arts
is second to none.
I mean, he just takes so many risks.
It's unbelievable.
This is interesting.
It's about, can a city cope with having it in your face?
And I know right at the beginning,
people in the audience felt so subjected to art in their face
that one of my artists got hit.
They couldn't cope with it.
Frank knew up in Stockton, because he had no arts at all
up there until the Dove Cup was started,
he knew that he could only cope with two days.
Stockton could only cope with two days, a Saturday and Sunday.
Any more than that, the natives go wild.
And over the years, he has educated them,
so it's now a week.
And of course, in Cardiff, we educated people
to want more and more challenging stuff.
I'm sure we'll talk about this later,
but I think we've lost all that now.
I think we've lost the challenge.
I think we're going for something that is corporate.
I think it's been sanitized.
And I think people are genuinely scared.
Everything you see is just either in a building
where it's safe, but nothing is challenging anymore.
Fireworks in an orgy, it's just a mess.
Or in an audience, or marching through a crowd.
Anyway.
And hence, my support of Mass and the qualities it brought,
I felt, to the festival, but also to the people who took part.
They seem to really enjoy it.
And it's good that it's gone from strength to strength
over 25 years, but I'm sure it has been absolutely bloody awful
to try to fund.
I know that funding is is is horrendous.
And but when I look through it, I mean, for the sake of the recorder,
we've got lots of I've brought all my old stuff.
You know, you can tell I live in the past.
Oh, all the old programs, every single one.
I've got a memory of and every single artist
and every single person who volunteered and who helped.
And I'm sure you're saying with mass, you remember,
you know, all the kids who are now what they've got kids of their own.
And they're probably children.
That's right. And I think that that's what a city
thrives on is its history.
And if you get rid of its history or you or you or you start to denigrate
what's happened in the past, I think you're very poor for it.
And I think there's a lot of my adventure play kids.
I still meet them and they say, Hi, Mike, how you doing?
And I struggle to remember who they are.
But, you know, that could be Terry, who cut off the head of a chicken
outside the playground and watched it race down the road, you know,
or that sort of the Nedra kids who jumped on an inflatable
when he was one with nappy and nappy fell open and shit went everywhere.
But that's the context in which we were building new and exciting initiatives
where kids were allowed to play. Yes.
You know, you would give them saws and hammers and the GP
would deliver telegraph poles and they dig holes and they'd put it
in the ground themselves.
Now we build chip and structures, which is all safe.
Boring as hell.
So I don't know if you I might be talking about a surprise.
There's definitely a trade off between.
What can I say?
Freer, more libertarian times, I let's use the use of pyrotechnics
in the first five to six
carnival carnivals, something now we wouldn't have either the budget
or the entity given the rise of health and safety and risk assessments
in extremists.
I mean, we're all for minimizing risks.
The job is to actually make them appear bigger than they are.
So you've got to show.
And I'm sure I think you're right.
I think I think the audience has changed as well.
The audience has become not so much risk averse.
I think this is a lot of depth, haven't they?
They've got lowered up.
They're Americanized like this bloody Black Friday nonsense.
You know, and whereas before you'd say, look, come down.
When we did some like Malabar, when we set the streets on fire,
you know, when they did the show down the bay and there was all was it called?
What was the Spanish company?
I can't remember the name now.
Jar Jar was Jar Jar.
Certainly. But there was another one anyway.
And they fired rockets in the audience.
And, you know, initially, people would say, you can't do that.
It's too dangerous.
Well, if you look at them when they fire a rocket, they turn their back on the person.
So they're in the way of the rocket.
They're entirely professional.
You know, the only fear is in your head, not them.
I've got no fear about them.
Maybe because I've seen it.
I think there's a fatality associated with the Cardiff Summer Festival.
Is there? Have I missed something?
Not to my knowledge.
I might have been a few babies born afterwards or a few heart attacks.
I don't know. But and I think that's I know.
We've I've been so far so long out of it,
because when I started also, I wanted to do certain things on the street.
Like I wanted to crane
a caravan up in the sky and I wanted people to fall out of it.
It was part of the show.
And I would go to the planner and say, go to the planner and say, look,
this is what I want to do. You can't do that.
Why can't I do that?
You say, well, I don't like it.
I said, look, with the greatest respect,
I don't care whether you like it or not.
It's whether or not it goes against planning regulations.
And I don't have to go to the police.
You know, you know, all the people, the police, the fire service, blah, blah, blah.
And because I was in their territory,
I found it difficult to get through to them.
So we created the events liaison panel.
Ah, right.
And it's the first one in the country.
Lovely. Which meant that they all sat around a table.
And then you get
Jerry Toms, who was at the time the head of whatever police in Cardiff,
when somebody like planner said, oh, I'm not too sure about that.
The people were, why can't you do that?
You know, and he and he was so he was excellent.
He was he was one of the main reasons the Cardiff festival got off the ground
because he had an incredibly positive approach to it.
I didn't know that.
But it's fascinating to hear that.
And nothing by bringing in the top policeman on board and him
joining you in that vision that he was on to a fire service.
The same and the planners and and all the health and safety and the
the ambulance service.
They were all involved. Highways. Highways.
Yes, I was.
You see, they in the end,
I could almost write a blank check in terms of what I could and couldn't do.
I could close roads off.
I could set fire to the streets.
I could I could hang things off buildings like I remember the
there was a Nila Marari from from Paris who did these massive blow up sculptures.
I was a great big flamingo on top of one of the department stores.
You know, and stuff like that.
And I don't know whether you could do that these days.
I don't even know if the will is there or indeed the
I don't know, the the guts to try.
Yeah, yeah.
Maybe it's flair.
I mean, but it is guts.
It's it's and also I think sometimes you run the risk of trying to be too gutty,
trying to take on too much.
And that's when I got the awful reputations I have, I'm sure of.
Of oh, he doesn't listen.
He's pig head is bull headed.
And I think it's down to knowing the vision you want
of having the people with you who actually support you
and going for it and taking that risk.
I'm I nowadays, I mean, it is.
I find it quite upsetting that.
There's nothing left apart from stuff that's bolted on.
You know, the big weekend was a was a classic
that came on the back of a fag packets.
Thought, well, why can't we do this?
So I went to the showman's guild.
They said, oh, there's no reason why not.
But we're not too sure about.
So the first year they brought crap machines,
some good machines and some crap machines.
This is the one that was right next to the Welsh office.
The seat of government in Wales effectively.
That stopped John Redwood.
Yes, exactly. And you put a fun fair next to it year on year.
I always loved that jigs to position.
Yeah, the great unwashed with their hot dogs and kids having a lovely time
with a few meters of the gray buildings where they're in the gray suits.
Well, he can get in, John Redwood.
He couldn't. He wouldn't.
He tried to drive in and there was a great machine in the way.
And he wanted the machine to be moved.
And we said, no, you know, you can get off out the car
and walk through the front door.
We're not stopping.
The lyrics to the Welsh national anthem while you're doing it.
Oh, yes. Well, he might mime.
Yes. But I remember the after after the
on the night before that opened, because, of course, that was the feature.
Very importantly in in Mass over the years as we joined things together
and we shared resources.
Yeah. But there was the the Lord Mayor at the time now, Vic Riley,
who's dead now, wonderful guy.
I saw him walking up one of the streets with the fairground rides
and was walking along, looking like this.
And I came up to him. He didn't know me from Adam.
And I said, Oh, good evening, Mr. Mayor.
He said, Oh, hello.
You know, I said, Who the hell are you?
I said, This is great, isn't it?
He said, Yeah, it was my idea.
I said, Was it?
I said, Well, you're to be congratulated as a member of the public.
Well done.
But next year, do you think you could go along that street
and up that street?
The next week, after the successful big weekend,
he stood up in a full council meeting, said, Great idea of mine.
Fantastic weekend.
I want next year for the fair to go that street and that street.
And then it grew like Topsy after that.
It's a lovely story. And I think
I know a few people who claim to have started Swicker
after all the carnival carnival in my time as well.
Oh, well, I congratulated them with equal.
Yes. Let them.
It doesn't matter who takes the credit as long as you give me the money.
You know, I can do and I want to carry on the way I want to carry on.
Yes. So and I think.
But what was interesting is that from those early beginnings
and that great support that swelled up and the support of Cardiff
and so it's in the media, but they were always a bit
funny, strange about it.
I'm not too sure.
We never got an awful lot of publicity.
I don't know why.
Oh, apart from when somebody took all their clothes off, of course,
or anything like that.
But we are in fact close to this interview.
Should you be listening to this sometime in the future?
Sorry? We, of course, are fully clothed.
Oh, yes. No, no, no, no, no.
Well, I am.
Not sure about Steve.
But anyway, I mean, you couldn't even get the date right.
He said the fifth it was 2015 when it's 2014.
Never mind. Never mind.
Anyway, you can count that at the end.
But out of that spawned
a lot more opportunities throughout the year.
As we found as people realize that,
if you like, that open arts policy, that accessibility policy
actually ticked a lot of the corporate boxes
and the city striving.
I don't know about the county, but the city striving to provide
a really excellent service for the public.
So you were clearly.
So you're you're weak.
You're weak.
Was going all that was going to be was a
what do you call it?
And a couple of meetings of European ministers.
And I said, look, why can't we do something for the public?
Do the public know anything about Europe?
No. Do we know why we're going into Europe?
Do we know how much it cost us all that?
So we decided to create a vehicle, a cultural vehicle
to go alongside, you feel like the business,
which is a classic model these days.
And we ended up with Europe Week.
And what came out of that, of course, was one of the most
most proudest of inventions.
And I've got to say, Kerry James, I've got to give credit for
and that the programming team of the Hayes Island gigs.
Who would have thought turning Hayes Island
into a lovely gig space right outside St. David's Hall?
So what used to happen is that you used to come out with their
dickey bows from St. David's Hall at night to find just
I mean, let's face it, a lot of people in anoraks
and having drinks and stuff like that.
And of course, you know, I wonder,
I'm going to ask you a question now.
Do you think that Swicker,
the artistic policy and the vision behind mass
did it change slightly over the years?
With given the the the artist coming in from the festival,
did it give you spark ideas?
Ah, I say indirectly, I mean, overall, as you pointed out,
I mean, it was a good self and your team who
paved the way literally and opened the streets of Cardiff
so that carnival could be take its place amongst those street activities.
We used to admire people like Dada Dang,
who were the Italian costume drummers who came over.
So I think the right word would be to inspire us.
Often, you know, here on our doorstep and, as you said,
nine times out of 10 or even 10 times out of 10, free of charge,
were some of the the best acts in the UK and indeed from abroad
were being brought so that not only ourselves,
and by that I mean the our team of artists and designers and makers
who really had nothing better to go and look at other people's work
and be inspired, but also the the other two groups,
the our community participants.
Again, it's sort of up the ante for them.
You know, we want to be as good as what we saw in Europe week or whatever.
And the most important is that the work you did over the years
educating the audience so that the audience for the very first parade
so the very first parade 1990, it came down to St.
Mary Street, which at that point was motorized
and had a road divide in the middle.
And it came down one side.
So for one year only, we had a parade which was not visible
from the other side of the street because that was a working road, you know.
But we moved from those positions where, you know, as you built up
the events, the ASEAN panel, as you built up your track record
of not merely designing events, but delivering them as you described them,
then we were able to follow, I think, in the wake of that
as, you know, I mean, you were the
pathfinder, the pioneer, the the door opener, particularly in terms of
getting other departmental officials to even consider
that these things were worthwhile, because, you know,
if you're ahead of drains, you just want to talk drains, you know.
But I think, you know, you were yes, I think you were
kind of city council's captain of fun for a number of years.
And yeah, no, that was that really helped us in many, many ways.
For which was suitably grateful.
I know. Yes, I'm glad you said that.
Because over the years, I mean, it's what I left in.
Well, I'm still trying to remember when it was 95, 94, 95 to go to Birmingham.
Dreadful place.
And their lives will be in touch.
I don't give a.
Yeah.
Yeah. And it's been what, 10 years now, 10 years
since a decade ago.
Yeah, since I left 16.
No, yeah.
Whatever. No, I don't know.
I can't remember now.
But you see, I'm losing my brain about getting older.
But and you kind of lose sight of what
when somebody comes up to you
and to the other day, I do this community thing called the big picnic
or did last year anyway.
And there's a guy there.
And I said to him, I said, I know you.
And he looked at me, said,
you worked on the first street fest with me being one of the public judges.
how did you remember that?
Because you remember good things, don't you?
Good moments. Yeah.
And it's and lots of people over the years,
especially people of my age, like I'm nearly 60 now.
They say, oh, we remember that.
Do you remember that?
Do you know that kids don't remember it?
And you talk about history, and this is why this project is so good.
Because, you know, there was a time there was a time when Cardiff was buzzing
and its streets were extremely vibrant.
That's right. And now it's just full of David's to center
and which owns some of the land that used to be ours.
And you can't you can't use it without their permission.
We know that we're not allowed to use it either.
I mean, that's unbelievable.
They don't support the carnival anyway.
It's absolutely unbelievable.
They won't even give us a free use of the hoop site.
That's unbelievable.
We could buy it off them for two to four thousand pounds, which we don't own.
Which is a hoop site now.
It's the one outside of the new library.
All right. That's the one where the there's that big burger bar in the summer.
Either way, I mean, it's their land.
If you want to be there, you pay.
Right. Well, I mean,
it's not dreadful that we I remember when I when I moved to Birmingham,
Cardiff City Council or County Council.
Had an arts policy to create an arts policy.
And the week after that, they got rid of all the community grants,
community arts grants.
And I thought, well, what sort of bloody policy is that?
They haven't followed it through.
Nothing's been followed through.
There is no policy document.
There's nothing that people can in different departments can work towards.
Do you think that what you were trying to achieve and achieved,
certainly in the early days, which have been lost in your absence,
that some of that might have been easier to secure?
Had Cardiff is unusual as a local authority.
Those has been in the from ninety one onwards,
for instance, all the other valleys, local authorities would have had a dedicated
arts development officer and team in post.
Of course, none of those things existed and still don't exist in Cardiff.
So it was left to say Mavericks in the best sense of the word,
like yourself, to to take on.
Yeah, imagine you had an arts development team to plug your
celebration vision into it would have been a lot easier.
But I mean, that wasn't the case in Cardiff, was it?
I had one. I had one. But it was under adventure play.
And that's where Tracy Harding started in the arts team.
And Emma Gellert was on the arts team as well.
And the building team and there was an outdoor pursuits team.
And when when there was what's urban aid, you know, an urban aid came in.
I talk about the golden days when the lottery came on board.
But there's so much money. Urban aid.
I had so many more staff working with these kids.
But yeah, I think to answer the question.
A position gives you a certain degree of position.
You know, people saying, you know, that
I was always known as a maverick because basically was created out of nothing.
Yeah, it wasn't it wasn't intentional.
Well, I think it's rather wonderful that that's how this all came about.
Well, it was it was organic.
Yes. Which is very you can't do that these days.
No, at all. Because everything or you do it voluntary or you're expected to do it
voluntary, which was the way the council are going.
Everything is going to be voluntary and, you know, you're going to be left with no
services whatsoever.
And it's a shame that the arts have arts have always suffered, haven't they?
It's always been the poor, the poor.
There's a non statutory. Yes.
Yes. Times authority, local authorities, I mean, statutory provision, arts and
culture, non statutory.
I mean, it's the first to go to the wall.
Yeah. I mean, I always said to Kate, my wife, that if I ever win the lottery, if
I do it for every lottery and I win a serious amount of money, I am going to set
the festival up and do it.
I think that's excellent.
Yes. But whether or not to be in Cardiff, I don't know.
Wherever it is at some point in the future.
Watch this space.
We'd like to. Mike, can I just thank you for that wonderful interview?
And I think at this point, we have to for future generations who are listening out
there, I'm sure, point out that Mike is an unsung hero of the Cardiff Carnival and
learning about those early days about getting started from scratch and kicking
open the doors of bureaucracy. Mike Chad, you're a carnival hero.
Thank you very much indeed.
Thank you.